# Microbiome Mini-course: Data Presentation Workshop

Date: Friday May 14, 2021 <br>
Time:  3:00-5:00 p.m. <br>


## Workshop summary

A hands-on tutorial discussing tools and tips for figure making and data presentation. This is meant to be a fun, practical tutorial on using the free, open-source vector graphics editor Inkscape as well as RStudio with the package ggplot2. We first cover the basics of Inkscape and go through several exercises, then do a group critique of a real figure, and finally replot the data to refine in RStudio.


## Preparation before class

[**Inkscape**](https://inkscape.org)
Inkscape is an open-source, cross-platform (MacOS, Windows, or Linux) graphics editor that is a good free alternative to Adobe Illustrator. We will learn the basics of using Inkscape. Please download and install before class; note that a fresh install may take up to 15 minutes. 

[**RStudio Desktop**](https://www.rstudio.com)
RStudio is a free integrated development environment (IDE) for R, allowing us to write and run code, with many additional features and customizability. We will be generating and refining plots in RStudio using the ggplot2 package. You should already have R, RStudio, and ggplot2 installed from the previous tutorial. If not, please download and install before class. 

Advantages of using free tools:
- No dependence on expensive licenses, which may be lost after leaving institution
- No pirating software
- Facilitates sharing knowledge with others 

Disadvantages:
- Free or open-source usually means fewer features and perhaps more bugs and crashes; be patient and save your work frequently!

*Note: During our virtual class, I will demo exercises while sharing my screen. As a participant, you may also be asked to share your screen to encourage everyone to try these exercises on their own computer and become familiar with the software. Note that this workshop is meant to be casual, fun, and to facilitate learning!*

## Inkscape exercises

We briefly cover the difference between [raster and vector images](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1WP622YQeQTGh7a6g0D4qdTETr5GE8pV1PyJQhs2Z68U/edit#slide=id.g5843f28961_0_116). Then we go through a series of exercises together to learn how to use basic tools in Inkscape. These are meant to provide a foundation. *Disclaimer: I am not an expert, just self-taught!*

**Inkscape Basics**: We learn to navigate and use some basic tools and functions
  - General [interface](https://github.com/itskathylam/DataPres/blob/main/inkscape/interface_areas.png) ([Source](https://inkscape-manuals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/interface.html))
  - Page dimensions
  - Zoom (commands bar, + and -)
  - Draw shapes; resize with and without maintaining aspect ratio
  - Draw text; adjust space between words and kerning
  - Draw straight lines; draw manual lines and adjust nodes
  - Adjust Fill and Stroke (colours, stroke style)
  - Align objects (by eye with ruler, automatically with command)
  - Save as pdf (File > Save a copy)
  - Export as png (page, drawing, selection)
  
**Simplifying**: We smooth manually drawn strokes \ 
  - Select the pencil tool
  - Draw a freehand line
  - Path > Simplify (repeat as desired) 
  - Alternatively: change the smoothing parameter before drawing the freehand line

**Clipping**: We isolate an object in a photograph
  - Download this [photograph of a Petri dish]()

**Editing**: We modify an existing vector graphic
  - Search for a vector graphic of a laboratory mouse on Wikimedia Commons
  - Download the svg file
  - Open in Inkscape
  - Ungroup
  - Try deleting some line objects
  - Try manually adjust some nodes

**Tracing**: We convert a raster image into a vector image
  - Search for the NIH logo on Google (to add to a poster presentation for example)
  - Import into Inkscape
  - Select object
  - Path > Trace Bitmap > Multiple Scans > uncheck Smooth; select Colours and specify a number of Scans that approximates the number of colours in the image 
  - Click Update to get a preview 
  - Click OK; the new vector image will be generated on top of the raster image


## Figure Critique 

We critique a real figure generated by and used with permission from my colleague. 
- Download this [multi-panel figure](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1g-jVRbaFcsVHsaa5OzxZRhTRX0NRG7Ko/view?usp=sharing) 
- Take 5 minutes to carefully look at each panel as well as the figure as a whole
- Write down 5 things that you think could be improved. *Remember: The goal is not to deride the figure but to try to objectively improve it to help convey the science in a clear, easily readable way.*
- We will share and discuss these points as a group while examining the figure in Inkscape


## Figure Refinement in RStudio using ggplot2

>“The **g**rammar of **g**raphics tells us that a statistical graphic is a mapping from data to **aes**thetic attributes (colour, shape, size) of **geom**etric objects (points, lines, bars).” <br>
>“**ggplot** is designed to work iteratively. You start with a layer… then add layers.” <br>
-- Hadley Wickham, ggplot2, 2nd ed. 

We recreate a few of the panels in the figure above and refine the plots together using ggplot2.

- Download [data1](), a recreation of the data in panel (a)
- Download [data2](), a recreation of the data in panel (g)
